The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flying Plover, by G. E. Theodore
Roberts

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Flying Plover
       His stories, told him by Squat-by-the-fire

Author: G. E. Theodore Roberts

Illustrator: Charles Livingston Bull

Release Date: October 11, 2022 [eBook #69135]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLYING PLOVER ***







[Illustration: Cover art]




[Frontispiece: "It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show his
nose outside of his hiding-place" (_See page_ 45)]




[Illustration: Title page]




  _Flying Plover_

  HIS STORIES, TOLD HIM BY SQUAT-BY-THE-FIRE


  BY

  G. E. THEODORE ROBERTS


  _Author of
  "The Red Feathers," "Hemming, the Adventurer," "Captain Love," etc._


  ILLUSTRATED & DECORATED BY
  CHARLES LIVINGSTON BULL


  _L. C. Page & Company_
  BOSTON * MDCCCCIX




  _Copyright_, 1909,
  BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
  (INCORPORATED)


  _All rights reserved_


  First impression, June, 1909



  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




CONTENTS


I. The Mountaineer People

II. The Bear, The Moose, and the Walrus

III. Adventures of King Bear Continued

IV. How Fire came to the Mountaineers

V. How Porcupine Killer learned still more about the Wonderful Fire

VI. Why Old King Walrus went away from the Mountaineers' Country

VII. Another Story of Gluskap and his People




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show his nose outside of
his hiding-place" (See page 45) .... Frontispiece

"He left his hiding-place and chased the bear"

"'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow"

"He waved the long stick around his head"

"Away they ran, howling and roaring"

"Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily"




FLYING PLOVER



I

THE MOUNTAINEER PEOPLE

Both of Flying Plover's parents had died when he was a little baby,
and ever since--for six long years--he had lived with his
grandmother.  The old woman's name was Squat-by-the-fire.  She was
the wisest person in the tribe, in spite of the fact that an old man
who lived in another village said that he knew twice as much as
anybody else in the whole world.  She was deep in medicine and
history and story-telling.  She could paint fine pictures on bark and
cured skins, and was skilful in the carving of wonderful little
figures in wood and bone and walrus ivory.  She knew so much, and
looked so wise, and had such bright eyes, that many of the tribesmen
believed that she was a magician.

The tribe that Flying Plover and his grandmother belonged to lived
far north, in that bleak and unexplored country called Labrador.
They spent the summer months near the coast, where they fished in the
great bays for cod and seals, and in the rivers for salmon and trout.
They traded with the few white settlers and missionaries, and with
the Eskimo people.  At the approach of winter they traveled inland,
with the great herds of caribou, into the sheltered valleys of the
mountains.  As the winter is a much longer season than the summer, in
that country, these people spent the greater part of every year in
the mountain forests--and so they are called the Mountaineer Indians,
or the Mountaineers.  But this book is not about the tribe, but is
full of the stories that old Squat-by-the-fire told to little Flying
Plover, in the long winter evenings.

_You_ can not sit by the old woman's fire, and smell the herbs she
was always steeping, and play with the little figures which she
carved so cleverly, as Flying Plover could; yet I hope you will like
her stories, for all that.




II

THE BEAR, THE MOOSE, AND THE WALRUS

The other children of the village were afraid of Flying Plover's
grandmother, because of her bent back, and wrinkled face, and bright
dark eyes.  Though she had never so much as said a harsh word to any
one of them, and though her medicines had saved the lives of many of
them, yet they would never follow Flying Plover into the big lodge
where she sat all day by the fire, steeping her fragrant herbs and
thinking of all manner of wonderful things.  They said that she could
turn a little boy, or a little girl, into any kind of animal or bird
in the world, without any more trouble than snapping her fingers.
That was nonsense; but some of the men and women believed it, too.
Magicians were not very rare things in that region (at least to
people who believed in them) and you were just as likely as not to
think that you saw one every time you went out for a walk.  But
Squat-by-the-fire was not a magician, and could not have turned a
little boy, or a little girl, into a bird or a four-legged animal if
she had snapped her fingers for fifty years.  She was just an old,
good, and very clever woman; and though she loved little children and
was glad to be able to make medicines for them, she really was not
sorry that they did not all run in and out of her lodge, with the
freedom of her grandson.  Flying Plover had learned her ways and
wishes and never disturbed the pots by the fire or the big jars in
the corner; but she knew that the other children, once they felt at
home, would knock things about at a terrible rate.  And she was far
too old and busy to begin to teach deportment to all the children of
the village.  But Flying Plover never caused her any trouble, and was
not in the least afraid of her.

One evening, when the raw-hide door of the lodge was fastened tight,
and the fire burned cheerily and smokily on the earthen floor, and
the wind moaned outside, the old medicine woman asked, "What games
did you play to-day, little son of Swift Runner?"

"We played at battles," replied Flying Plover; "and they put me on
the Eskimo side, and so I was taken prisoner, and fastened to a tree.
I did not see much fun in that; so I made up another game, something
like deer-hunting, and we played that until it got dark.  But I like
battles best, except when I am an Eskimo.  Do the Eskimos always get
beaten in the real battles?"

"Our people have not been at war with the fat blubber-eaters for a
long, long time," replied the old woman.  "We used to battle with
them every summer; but it was a foolish thing to do, and brought a
great deal of sorrow and suffering to both peoples.  When my father
was a young man, our warriors used to chase the Eskimo warriors as
the timber wolves chase the young caribou.  But the missionaries have
taught us that killing and robbing are terrible sins--and I think
people should have known that before.  So now, when we want sealskins
and fish, we do not fight and rob, but we trade instead.  That is
better, for it does not call for the shedding of blood, the burning
of lodges, and torture and starvation, as of old.  Now the
blubber-eaters are a weak people; but hundreds and hundreds of
seasons ago they were a great nation.  But that was far beyond the
reach of my father's memory.  They were a mighty people though, once
upon a time; and then our nation was nothing more than a few weak
villages.  We were afraid of the blubber-eaters then, and never went
down from the mountains.  The Eskimo warriors chased our warriors
then, when they saw them, even as the timber wolves chase the young
caribou.  So it is with men and tribes and nations, little son of a
chief.  I have seen something of it, even with my own eyes.  The
Eskimo people were the great people; and next the Mountaineers were
mighty in battle; and now both the fat men of the ice and the hunters
of the mountains know that the white missionaries and the white
traders are their masters."

"That is very strange," remarked Flying Plover.  "The white men do
not look like great warriors, and they are very few in number."

"It is the mind," said old Squat-by-the-fire, touching her wrinkled
forehead with a gnarled finger.  "'T is the light inside the skull
that gives the mastery; though to listen to the story tellers, one
would believe that all the power lies in the biggest club and the
straightest arrow.  The minds of the white men are full of knowledge,
and caution, and courage.  That is why they are now the great people."

"They feed their brains with fine sweet puddings.  I think that is
why they are able to talk to our people so big and make the little
Eskimo boys go to school," said Flying Plover.

The old woman laughed; but it was not at her grandson's remark.  She
was thinking of the oldest story she had ever heard.

"There was a time, more than ten thousand summers ago, I should
think, when men were such weak, dull-witted creatures that they had
no mastery over anything but the smallest animals and birds," she
said.  "Oh, yes, that was a very long time ago, ages and ages before
the white man had ever been heard of.  The animals were the masters,
in those days, and it is a wonder that the poor, frightened creatures
that ran on two legs, and hid in caves and holes, kept alive at all.
Then, the wolves were as big as black bears, and the bears stood as
high as caribou, and the foxes were as big as timber wolves.  When a
hunter saw a fox, in those days, he was glad to climb a tree; and he
was lucky if a caribou did not come along and knock the tree over
with its head.  Or may be an eagle would catch sight of the man, and
swoop down and pick him out of the tree with its claws, as if he
weighed no more than a little brook trout."

"I am glad I did not live in those days," said Flying Plover.  "If
all the beasts were too big to kill, and there were no white men to
buy blankets from, what did people do for clothes to wear?"

"There were the hares," replied the old woman.  "They were six times
as large as they are now, but not much more dangerous unless they
were cornered.  And sometimes the bravest hunters managed to kill a
beaver or a musquash.  Even the mice were well worth hunting in those
days, and one fat mouse made a very good dinner for a small family.
Oh, it was a queer world, you may be sure!"

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her talk for a little while and opened a
leathern bag at her belt.  From it she drew a wooden pipe, a knife,
and a plug of dark-brown trade tobacco.  Soon the pipe was filled and
lit, and the blue smoke curling about her head.

"Did they have any tobacco in those days?" asked Flying Plover.

"No--nor fire to light it with," replied his grandmother.

The little boy was greatly astonished at that, and could not think
how people warmed themselves in winter, or cooked their dinner.  He
was just opening his mouth to ask about a dozen questions, when the
old medicine-woman, noticing it, hurried on with her talk.

[Illustration: "He left his hiding-place and chased the bear"]

"The king of the frozen north was a great walrus.  His tusks were as
long as a canoe paddle and his head as big as this lodge.  He lived
in a house built of icebergs, and was not afraid of anything in the
world.  This country had two kings.  One was a white bear, as big as
a trading schooner, and the other was a bull moose as tall as the
highest spruce tree in the forest.  When the moose was without his
horns he went far away to the westward and hid himself in a deep
valley--and then the white bear was king of all this country.  But
every year, as soon as the moose felt that his horns were full-grown
again, he left his hiding-place and chased the bear hundreds of miles
out of his kingdom.  So they went on, year after year, until, at
last, King Walrus heard about it.  Being a walrus he did not like
white bears.  The dislike was born in him, for, of course, he had
never had any trouble with bears himself.

"'I have no doubt that the moose is the rightful ruler of that
country,' he said.  'I'll just make a journey into that region and
set the matter right.'

"Of course what he really meant was that he would take the country
for himself.  He was growing ambitious.  He felt that such a mighty
chief should rule the whole world.  So one fine day in winter, just
after King Bear had sent King Moose trotting westward to his hidden
valley to grow a new pair of horns, up waddled King Walrus.  The bear
was five times as large as white bears are now; but old King Walrus
was ten times the size of the walruses of to-day.  King Bear saw at a
glance that he was not big enough to fight with his unexpected
visitor.  Knowing that all walruses are the enemies of all bears, he
did not have to think very hard to find a reason for the northern
king's visit.  His eyes grew red as the fire with the anger that
burned in his brain; but what he said was, 'I am highly honored and
unspeakably delighted at seeing you in my poor country.'

"'Hump,' grunted King Walrus,--for his manners were no better than
the manners of any other walrus, and, into the bargain, he was quite
short of breath from his overland journey in from the coast.  King
Bear saw that his only chance of keeping things pleasant was in being
polite.  He would give his visitor some valuable gifts, too.

"'This is an unexpected pleasure,' he continued.  'I was never so
honored before in all my life.  I am deeply moved by your
condescension.'

"By this time King Walrus had recovered enough breath to talk with.
'You will be moved still farther before very long,' he said.  Then he
laughed roaringly, for he had a very coarse sense of humor and
enjoyed nobody's jokes but his own.  The bear was bright enough, you
may be sure, and usually approved of jokes, but he did not laugh that
time.  He became so angry that he forgot all his caution.

"'What are you bellowing about, old blubber-sides?' he snarled.

"'Hey!  What was that you called me?' roared King Walrus, changing
his tune very quickly.

"'You may bellow as loud as you choose,' replied the bear, 'but you
can't frighten me with noise.'

"He was so angry that he was utterly reckless.  White bears have very
hot tempers, as you know.

"'I called you old blubber-sides,' he continued.  'I'll call you
worse names than that, if you don't go away from my country.  You
smell like rotten fish!  Go away!  Go away!'

"King Walrus was far too angry to reply to these insults in words.
His great sides shook with anger as the sea shakes with storm.  Like
a mountain lurching from its place, he floundered after King Bear at
the top of his speed, bellowing all the while like summer thunder.
The earth groaned and trembled--and King Bear ran like a frightened
hare.  He ran all day and all night; and not until then did the
bellowing of old King Walrus fall to silence behind him.  Then he sat
down and growled and groaned and snarled, so enraged was he at
finding himself an outcast from his own country.  At last he became
quieter and began to use his wits.

"'Old blubber-sides is too big for me,' he said--'and I think the
Moose will find the same trouble, when he gets back.  But here is a
country that does not look as if anyone governed it.  I'll be king of
this country.'

"It was a very dreary looking land in which the big white bear now
found himself.  He had never seen it before; and he had run so fast
and so blindly that he really did not know by what course he had come
or in what part of the world he was.  He went to the top of a hill
and looked all around him.  Nowhere was there any sign of woods or
water or sea-ice.  On every side, and right away to the edge of the
sky, lay rounded, treeless hills and wide, dreary barrens all covered
with snow.  The sight made the bear feel dreadfully grumpy, for
nowhere could be seen any movement of life--any promise of dinner.
And he was so hungry, after his long run, that his stomach felt as if
it contained a lump of ice."




III

ADVENTURES OF KING BEAR CONTINUED

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her talking and, with tender care,
knocked the ashes out of her pipe into the palm of her left hand.
She gazed narrowly at the ashes, before blowing them into the fire.

"That was good tobacco," she said.  "Every little bit of it turned
into smoke.  Indian tobacco was not so good; but just to think that
there once was a time when people didn't have any fire, even to light
their pipes and warm their bones at.  That must have been much worse
than not having any tobacco."

"Or to cook their dinners at," said little Flying Plover.  The old
woman nodded.  Her bright eyes were on the fire, and she was deep in
meditation.  Flying Plover watched her in silence for fully two
minutes.  Then he said, "I think King Bear was in King Walrus's
country."

"You are wrong.  But it is time for you to go to bed," said
Squat-by-the-fire.

"I am not sleepy.  Please tell me some more about King Bear," begged
the little boy.

"Well," said the old woman, "he stood on the top of the hill and
growled and roared, just as loud as he could, to see if anything
would hear him and come to find out his trouble.  Presently a crow
appeared out of the gray sky, and alighted on the snow.

"'You are making a horrible noise,' said the crow.  'What's the
matter with you?'

"'I am hungry,' replied the bear.  'Who is king of this country?'

"'We have no king.  This country is ruled by the people,' said the
bird.

"'Oh!' remarked King Bear, and scratched his ear.  He had never in
all his life heard of a country without a chief or a king.  'It looks
like a poor sort of place.  Where are the people?'

"'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow, turning his head over
his shoulder.  Sure enough, there were six wolves and two black bears
approaching the hill at a fast run.

[Illustration: "'Here come a few of them now,' said the crow"]

"'They don't seem to be at all afraid of me,' said King Bear,
gruffly.  'And yet I am big enough to kill them all with one of my
paws.'

"'You are very big,' admitted the crow.  'You are the biggest bear I
ever saw--and you seem to be colored wrong, too.  But that is neither
here nor there.  We do not think much of size in this country.'

"'Oh, don't you?' snarled King Bear.  'Well, perhaps you'll change
your views before very long.  And what do you mean by saying I am
colored wrong?'

"'Black and brown are the correct colors for bears,' said the crow.
'Dirty white looks both foolish and untidy.'

"Just then the six wolves and the two black bears reached the bottom
of the hill.  There they halted, and one of the wolves cried out,
'What are you doing here, big stranger?'

"'I am sitting on the top of a hill, admiring your beautiful
country,' replied the white bear, in a snarly voice.

"'What do you want?' asked the wolf.

"'Something to eat,' said the white bear.

"'Where did you come from?' asked the wolf.

"'You miserable creature, I came from my own country where I am
king,' roared the bear.  'And I want you to know that I did not come
here to answer your questions!  Bring me something to eat--a fat
caribou, or a couple of seals--or I'll try my teeth on you!'

"'Your talk is as big as your body; but neither big words nor big
bodies are much thought of in this country,' replied the wolf.

"King Bear was astonished at the wolf's daring in speaking to him so
impudently.  He had never been spoken to in that way before by any
common animal or bird.  Of course King Moose, his rival, had said
rude things to him every year; but that was to be expected and was
between kings.  But it made his blood bubble in his brain to hear
such words from that ordinary wolf, and to see the other common
creatures, and the crow grinning at the talk.  He was so angry that
he almost forgot the hungry-pain in his stomach.

"'I am a great king,' he roared, and got to his feet, ready to
destroy the six wolves and the two black bears with one sweep of his
mighty right paw.  But he did not do it!  He saw something running on
the snow, so fast that he could not make out what it was--and
suddenly it stopped close under his great nose and he saw that it was
a slim young man.  He was so astonished that he squatted back on his
haunches.

"'I have been listening to you,' said the young man, 'and I do not
like your talk.  Also, I do not like your looks.  You are too big and
too bold to be a safe companion for my people.'

"King Bear could do nothing but stare.

"'I am Gluskap,' continued the young man, 'and all the men and
animals in this land, for seven times as far as you can see in every
direction, are in my care.'

"'I never heard of you,' said the big white bear.

"The young man smiled at that.  Then he pointed his finger at the
stranger and gazed at him very hard with his bright eyes.

"'I feel queer.  My head spins 'round and 'round,' said the bear.  He
began to sway from side to side.  He stood on his four strong legs;
but still he swayed and swayed, and his mouth hung open and he
breathed very hard.

"'What--are--you--doing--to--me?' he gasped.

"'I am reducing you,' replied the young man.

"King Bear did not know what that meant--and he felt so queer that he
did not care.  All the white world seemed to go whirling around him.
At last he fell over, flat on his side.  And as soon as that had
happened he felt quite well again and jumped to his feet.  Well, he
blinked his red eyes and he glared and glared, for it looked to him
as if the man, the crow, the wolves, and the black bears had all
grown much larger.  But that was not what had happened at all.  The
change was in himself and not in the others.  Gluskap, with his
magic, had made him smaller and smaller until he was just exactly the
size of white bears now and smaller than common black bears were in
those days.

"'Now that you are a small bear and not at all dangerous to the peace
of this country, you may come with me and have something to eat,'
said Gluskap.  'And if you behave yourself I think my people will be
kind to you and let you live in this country.  Come, it is dinner
time.'

"He turned toward the south and walked slowly away.  Then the white
bear followed him, wondering to find himself so mild and obedient.
The other animals followed, too, and the crow flew on ahead.  One of
the wolves walked beside the white bear.

"'The crow told me that this country was without a king,' said the
bear.  'But that man is your king, surely!'

"'Oh, now, he is one of the gods,' said the wolf.  'He feeds us, and
keeps our enemies from harming us.  Is that what kings do for their
people?'

"'I never heard of a king doing things like that,' replied the white
bear.  'But what does he feed you with?' he asked, for again he felt
the hungry-pain in his stomach--and though he was so much smaller
now, the pain felt just as big as when he was his old size.

"'Just whatever you want,' said the wolf.  'His lodge is behind the
next hill, so you will soon know as much about it as I know.  All the
men and animals and birds are there by now, I think, waiting for
their food.  Don't you hear them talking?'  Oh, yes the white bear
heard them talking.  It sounded just like the running of sea waves up
and back along a pebbly shore.  And now the scents of that hidden
multitude reached his keen nose.  He smelt every kind of living
creature he had ever smelled before in all his life, except fish and
seals.  He knew that men were there, beyond the hill, and moose,
caribou, bears, wolves, foxes, otters, wild-cats, mink, porcupine,
red deer, woodchucks, hares, mice, beaver, muskrats, badgers, and all
kinds of birds.

"'Hah, that smells good,' he said, and sniffed very hard.  'That
certainly smells like a fine dinner.  I'll be puzzled to know what to
eat first.  A fat beaver would not be bad to start with, as there
does not seem to be any kind of fresh fish.'

"'You are all wrong.  You will not be allowed to eat any of those
animals.  They are waiting for their dinners just as hungrily as you
are; and what would they think, do you suppose, if Gluskap allowed
you to kill them and eat them?'

"'Then what on earth are we going to eat?' asked the white bear.

"'You'll soon find that out for yourself,' replied the wolf.

"Gluskap led the way straight up the side of the steep hill.  There,
on the other side, stood a great lodge of poles and bark, surrounded
by several hundred men, thousands of animals, and great flocks of
birds settling down and flying up and lighting again.  The white bear
gazed at the scene in astonishment.  There stood wolves and caribou
side by side, and hares and wild-cats lay together on the snow.

"'Why don't they fight?' he asked.  'Why don't the bears and wolves
eat the silly little men and the fat hares and beavers?'

"'No need of it,' said the wolf.  'It is easier to eat Gluskap's
food.'

"Now they halted at the edge of the crowd.  They saw Gluskap walk
into his great lodge.  Soon he came out with a basket in one hand.
He walked among the men and animals, scattering on every side
something that looked like sand.  The moment those little grains
touched the ground, each one became a piece of food.  A grain that
dropped in front of a beaver became a juicy fragment of pond-lily
root.  The grains that fell before the caribou turned into bundles of
caribou-moss.  The grains that fell near the bears and wolves and men
became meat and fish of many kinds.  Well, it was the most wonderful
thing that the white bear had ever dreamed of; and when he suddenly
found a big, fresh salmon and a lump of beaver flesh under his very
nose, he was too happy to do anything but eat and eat."

Old Squat-by-the-fire ceased her story-telling, leaned back against a
heap of robes and blankets, and closed her eyes.

"Did Gluskap make all the food out of sand?" asked Flying Plover.

"Yes.  Now you must go to bed, little son of a chief."

"Did King Bear stay with Gluskap?"

"Yes.  Go to bed now, Flying Plover."

"Didn't he ever go back to his own country?"

"Perhaps he did.  I don't know.  Go to bed."

"What happened to old King Walrus?"

"I won't tell you to-night.  Go to bed!"

"Did King Moose come home and fight him?"

"Go to bed!  Go to bed!  Go--to--bed!"

So, at last, while the fire still burned brightly, little Flying
Plover went to bed under a soft robe of furs--and with most of his
clothes on too.  But his grandmother sat up for an hour or two
longer, and smoked another pipeful of tobacco.




IV

HOW FIRE CAME TO THE MOUNTAINEERS

Flying Plover was awake bright and early next morning, and went right
out in the cold and snow to get wood for his grandmother's fire.  The
men of the village always kept the old medicine-woman's wood pile
well supplied--so the little boy had no chopping to do, but just
carried armfuls of dry sticks into the lodge.  Though it was nearly
breakfast time, the sun was not yet up; but a narrow yellow band
edged the horizon in one place, and in the faint twilight several
people besides Flying Plover were moving about out of doors.  Some
were getting wood, and some were carrying water from the hole in the
frozen brook.  Big Hunter, the chief of the village, was feeding
frozen fish to his sledge-dogs; for he and his sons were going to
make an early start in search of caribou.  The air was very still and
cold, and the tall trees which stood all around and among the lodges
snapped in the frost.  Little Flying Plover was too cold to even
shout out to his friends.  This was the part of the day which he did
not like--the short time before the fire was lighted and breakfast
was cooked.  So he worked very fast, running backward and forward
between the lodge and the wood pile.  His task was soon done; and
soon the fire burned cheerily in the middle of the lodge, the smoke
streamed up to the peak of the roof and out into the frosty air, and
the old medicine-woman put the tea-kettle and the frying-pan on the
coals.

After breakfast, Squat-by-the-fire gave her little grandson a lesson
in moccasin-sewing; and after the lesson she kept him at work at
making a pair of moccasins while she steeped medicines.  For a little
while in the afternoon he worked at carving a caribou from a block of
wood; but it was hard work, and he cut his finger; and after a whole
hour of scooping and cutting, the thing still looked more like a
block than a caribou.  He almost cried.  In fact, two tears rolled
out of his eyes and half-way down his fat cheeks before he remembered
that warriors do not weep and hastily wiped them away with the back
of his hand.  His grandmother did not let him know that she had seen
the tears; but she tied a piece of rag around his cut finger and told
him to go out and play with the other little boys.

That night, old Squat-by-the-fire told Flying Plover some more about
King Walrus, and about a man called Porcupine Killer.

"When King Moose returned to this country," she said, "with his fine
horns all ready for knocking King Bear about, and found old King
Walrus here instead, he was not at all pleased with the change.  One
look at the big walrus told him that he had met his master, horns or
no horns.  But he was full of courage and felt that right was on his
side--so with a snort of rage he tried to roll King Walrus from the
hill on which he lay, sleeping soundly.  But he might as well have
tried to roll the hill from under King Walrus.  There was a short and
terrible fight--and then poor King Moose limped away and lay down in
a distant forest to think the matter over.  He hid in the forest for
many days and asked every animal and bird that came within speaking
distance where King Bear had gone to.  But not one of them could tell
him that.  All they knew was that he had been chased out of the
country by the old blubber-mountain from the north.  The moose was
very sorry that no one could tell him where his rival had gone to.
He thought that he and King Bear together could drive King Walrus
back to his own country.  But as there seemed to be no chance of
finding the bear, he continued to live quietly in the distant forest.
For exercise, he knocked the great pine trees over with his horns.
None of the other animals were big enough for him to fight with--and
King Walrus was too big.

"The walrus did not stay in this country very long; but while he was
here, men suffered even more than they had suffered before.  The
reason for this was that a great many fierce animals from the north
had followed their king into this country.  The whole land was full
of bears and wolves and giant foxes; and people--mountaineer
people--died of hunger in their caves because the men were afraid to
go out and hunt.  It was not safe for a warrior to so much as show
his nose outside of his hiding-place.  If things had gone on in that
way for another moon, I think the whole tribe of mankind in this
country would have starved or been killed--and if that had happened
you and I would not be sitting here to-night."

"Where would we be sitting?" asked Flying Plover.

"We would not be sitting anywhere.  We would never have been born,"
replied the old woman.

"Why not?" asked the little boy.

But Squat-by-the-fire knew that if she answered any more of his
questions he would keep her busy all night.  So she hastened on with
her story.

"There was a young man named Porcupine Killer," she continued.  "He
had once killed a porcupine with only a flint knife for a weapon--and
porcupines in those days were larger than bears are now.  That is how
he got his name.  But the porcupine had been eaten years ago, and now
he was not able to go out and kill even a mouse.  You need not laugh
at that, for mice were then as big as beavers are now--and just as
good eating, too.  He knew that if he went ten yards from the narrow
mouth of his cave some great animal would leap upon him.  He had a
wife and little baby; and all the three had eaten for two days was
part of a fish that a hawk had accidentally dropped in front of the
cave as it flew over, chased by an eagle.  He could not think of
anything to do.  When night fell he would creep out and feel about
for some bones.  With so many great animals killing and feeding on
all sides there would surely be plenty of fresh bones lying around.
He had seen a pack of great wolves chasing a giant caribou along the
valley below his cave early that morning.  If he could find the bones
of that caribou he would be lucky.  The marrow in one of those bones
would supply them with many meals.  But as he had to wait until night
to begin his hunt and had nothing to do in the meantime, he lay down
on a bed of dry leaves and fell asleep.

"A wonderful dream came to Porcupine Killer while he lay asleep in
his dark cave, with his belt drawn tight around his stomach because
of the hungry-pain.  Some good spirit must have come and whispered
that dream into his brain, for in it there was hardly one thing like
anything he had ever seen; and yet it was all just as if he looked
down at something that was really happening.  He saw a place of flat,
white sand (at first he thought it was snow, for there is no sand so
white in this country) with the sea at one edge of it, green as
leaves in Spring and blue as the sky, and strange-looking trees and
bushes along the other side.  On the sand, mid-way between the trees
and the edge of the beautiful sea, stood a man.  Porcupine Killer had
never before seen such a queer-looking man.  His skin, all over his
face and body, was as dark as the roof of this lodge where the smoke
has painted it.  He was naked as a trout.  At his feet lay a bunch of
dry grass and a heap of little sticks.  In his hands he held
something that looked like a very short bow with a doubled, twisted
cord made of some kind of vine, and a piece of dry, flat wood.  He
sat down on the sand, crossed his legs, crumbled a little of the dry
grass between his hands and placed the powder close beside him, on
the sand.  Then, holding the flat piece of wood firm between his
knees with his left hand, he placed the cord of the bow in a notch
across it and began to draw it swiftly back and forth, back and
forth, quick as lightning.  The spirit of Porcupine Killer (for it
did not seem to him that his body was in the dream at all) bent close
above the queer-looking black man, eager to find out what he was
trying to do.  The stranger worked and worked, his hand flying back
and forth so fast that it could scarcely be seen.  The sweat stood
out on his black skin.  Soon a faint, blue mist crept up from the
notch in the slab of dry wood--or was it from the flying cord of
twisted vine?  It floated up and melted in the sunlight; then it
floated up again; and again it melted to nothing.  Porcupine Killer
could make no sense out of it; but he liked the look of the dry, blue
mist.  The worker now clutched the wood tight between his knees,
keeping his right hand still speeding with the bow, and with the
fingers of his left hand took up a pinch of the grass-powder and
sprinkled it where the cord of vine flew along the notch.  Now the
blue mist arose in a little cloud, and climbed high above the
worker's head before it melted.  It had a smell--a smell that seemed
very good to the spirit of Porcupine Killer.  His nose had never met
with anything like it before, and yet it awoke a strange craving
within him, and seemed to speak of comfort and safety.

"Still the strange man went on with his strange work, driving the bow
back and forth with his right hand and sprinkling a little of the
powder of dry grass with his left.  Suddenly the mist puffed white
and thick, and in a moment faded to something so faint that it had no
color at all, and yet seemed to waver upward and melt away, even as
the mist had floated and melted--and, in the same instant, a living
thing, yellow and bright and no bigger than a baby's finger, moved on
the flat piece of wood.

"It was like a bright, strange bird.  It was like a beautiful flower
that bursts suddenly into bloom and life from a husk of bray seed.
It was like magic!--like the eye of a god!--like the secret of life!
At least so it seemed to Porcupine Killer.  Nothing before, except
the feelings of love and courage, had ever awakened so much joy in
him.

"'What is it?  Give it to me,' he cried; but his spirit had no voice,
and the man on the sand did not so much as turn his head.  He was
still busy with the magic thing that had so suddenly come to his
hand.  Now he ceased the movement of the bow and let it fall on the
sand, where it lay unheeded, with a faint mist arising from the cord
of twisted vine.  He fed the yellow, living thing with leaves of the
dry grass, and it grew and leapt under his hand.  Suddenly he turned
to the little bunch of dry grass at his elbow--and, quick as thought,
every fiber of it had blossomed to red and yellow.  Now, from the
heap of twigs and sticks, he fed that wonderful, leaping thing that
had flashed into life but a few moments before, no larger than a
baby's finger, and that now covered a space on the sand as wide and
long as a snow-shoe track."

"What was it?" asked little Flying Plover, in an awed whisper.

"It was fire--fire like that," replied the old medicine-woman,
pointing at the glowing coals and leaping flames within the circle of
stones in the center of the floor.  For a moment the child looked
puzzled, and glanced at his grandmother to see if she were laughing
at him.  Then he nodded his head.

"Yes, the fire is alive," he said; "but why did the queer, black man
rub the bow across the flat piece of wood?"

"There were no matches in those days such as the traders sell now,"
replied the old woman.  "And fire could not be struck out of the
flint as it was when I was young, because there was no steel with
which to strike the flint.  All these things that I am telling you
happened a very long time ago, little son of a chief."

Again Flying Plover nodded his head.

"And then what did the queer man on the sand do when his fire was
burning so well?" he asked.

"I do not know what he did," replied Squat-by-the-fire, "for just
when the sticks were crackling and the flames leaping high as the
flames of our own fire, the spirit of Porcupine Killer flew back to
his body and poor Porcupine Killer opened his eyes and found himself
lying on the bed of leaves in his dark, narrow cave.  And the
hungry-pain gnawed him again, and he heard his wife crying beside him
as she rocked the little baby in her arms.  But there was a lightness
in his heart that had not been there when he fell asleep, and his
dream was as clear as a picture in his mind.  He got up quickly from
his bed of leaves and dry moss, and crawled to the back of the cave
where some of his bows and spears were stored, along with several
pieces of seasoned wood for the making of arrows.  Without telling
the woman a word of his wonderful dream, he broke one of his bows in
two pieces.  But the string of caribou sinew was not what he wanted.
He felt about in the dark, and soon found some strands of tough
hemlock root which he had once used for snares.  Finding three
strands of a length, he plated them together into one thick, tough
cord--and with this he strung a piece of the broken bow.

"'What are you doing?' asked his wife.

"'Perhaps you shall soon see.  Have patience,' he replied.  The poor
woman thought that hunger and despair had weakened his mind.  But she
stopped her weeping and drew near to him, the better to see what he
was about.  Having fixed a short bow to suit him, he broke across his
knee many of the sticks and slabs of seasoned wood, from which he had
intended to make such fine arrows.  Across the flat side of one of
these pieces he scraped a shallow groove with his stone knife.  When
that was done, he collected ten handfuls of dry moss and grass from
his bed.  Some of this he powdered between his hands, as he had seen
the strange, naked man do in his dream.  Then, when all was ready, he
sat on the cold floor of the cave and began to draw the cord of the
bow swiftly back and forth across the flat piece of wood, just as the
black man had done.  He worked and worked--and at last his nose
caught the smell of the blue mist, though he could not see the mist
because of the darkness of the cave.  But he saw beautiful, bright
sparks darting along the groove in the wood.  By that time, his right
arm ached as if it had been twisted and beaten with a club; but he
kept the bow flying, and began to sprinkle the powdered grass with
his left hand.  Then (as he had seen in his dream) the small creature
of magic life--the bright, yellow thing that ate the powdered grass
and sprang upward for more--flashed into being on the slab of wood
between his knees.  The squaw uttered a low cry of wonder; but
Porcupine Killer said not a word.  He fed dry moss and grass to the
wonderful thing--and it grew, and flashed with a redder color.  Then,
doing what he had seen the naked, black man do, he slipped it from
the wood to the heap of dry stuff at his side.  The bright tongues
leapt upward, throwing a beautiful light into every corner of the
cave.  The mist, which seemed to be its breath, streamed along the
top of the cave and floated out through a hole in the rocky roof.
The man heaped fragments of seasoned wood upon it, one by one.  Then
he felt the heat on his face and hands, and all through the chilly
cave, like summer.

"'Come close,' he said to the woman.  'It is warm as the sun when the
willows have their leaves and the yellow butterflies swarm on the
sand by the river.'

"'What is it?  What is this strange thing that you have made with
your hands?' whispered the woman.

"'Nay, I did not make it.  It is the gift of some kind god, bestowed
on me while I dreamed,' replied Porcupine Killer.  'Come close, and
feel the comfort of it Do not fear it, for I am sure it is good.  If
it is not good, then why does the sight of it awaken joy in my heart?'

"The woman drew near, with her baby in her arms; and now, for the
first time in her life, she felt the warmth of fire.

"'It is like the sun in the spring time,' she said.  'It melts the
chill of the frost out of my bones, and gladdens my eyes.'

"But Porcupine Killer did not answer, for he was busy feeding the new
fire with all the wood he could find in the cave; and, of course, the
fire grew and grew, and sent showers of sparks flying along the roof.

"'It grows too fast,' cried the woman.  'You feed it with too much
dry wood.  It may eat up the stone walls of the cave, if it grows any
larger.'

"Just then, a spark dropped on the bed of grass and moss and leaves
and, in a moment, a little flame began leaping here and there.  But
Porcupine Killer, who had a bright mind, saw the danger.  He snatched
up the burning stuff in his hands and threw it upon the big fire.
The little flame touched his fingers.  He cried out, with pain and
surprise.

"'What is the matter?' asked the woman.

"'The magic thing stung me,' replied Porcupine Killer."

The old medicine woman ceased her talk and lit the tobacco in her
pipe with a brand from the fire.  Flying Plover waited politely until
he saw, by the clouds of tobacco smoke, that the pipe was well
alight.  Then, as his grandmother seemed to have forgotten to go on
with the story, he said, "I wonder if that was truly the way fire
first came to our tribe?"

Squat-by-the-fire glanced at him quickly, but never said a word.  She
knew that the little boy was trying to get her to go on with the
story--and that was what she had not the slightest intention of
doing.  If she went on telling him stories as long as he would
listen, neither of them would ever get any sleep, and her brain would
become quite dry and brittle from too much inventing.

"I think Porcupine Killer must have been sorry that he did not have
anything to cook at his fine, new fire," remarked the little boy.

The old woman was just going to tell him that people did not know
anything about cooking in those days--but she didn't.  Flying Plover
was clever; but so was she.  Instead of saying the words that so
nearly slipped from her tongue, she gave a raspy little cough.  Then,
in a faint whisper, she said, "My throat is so sore from talking so
much, that I fear all the skin is worn off the inside of it."

That seemed a very strange and interesting thing to Flying Plover.

"Oh, let me see it," he cried.  "How long will it take to grow on
again?"

His grandmother almost lost her temper at that.  Anyway, she soon had
him snug in bed; and it was not long before he was sound asleep.




V

  HOW PORCUPINE KILLER LEARNED STILL
  MORE ABOUT THE WONDERFUL FIRE

During the night snow began to fall.  In the morning the sky was
still gray with it; and all day it continued to weave its gray
curtains in the windless air.  So little Flying Plover stayed indoors
most of the day, cutting and gouging at the block of wood which he
hopefully believed would soon resemble a caribou, and watching old
Squat-by-the-fire at her medicine-work.  The old woman did not talk
much while she was mixing and attending to the pots, of steeping
herbs; but by mid-afternoon she was ready to go on with the telling
of her story.  Her voice sounded quite natural again, and the little
boy wondered that the skin had grown on it so quickly.  But he said
nothing about his wonderment, for he did not want to divert her from
the story.

"When Porcupine Killer felt the burn of the fire on his hand he was
frightened at first," said the old woman, "but he soon recovered from
his fright, and began to study the blazing sticks and red coals very
attentively.  He held out his hand, feeling the pleasant warmth.  He
advanced it closer and closer to the flames, noticing that the warmth
increased and still increased the nearer he went, until at last it
hurt.  Then he touched a red coal with his finger--and that made him
hop.  He sucked his finger, and thought very hard.  'It stings when
you touch it,' he said, 'but if you do not touch it, it gives you
warmth, like the sun in summer.  If I take a stick in my hand, at the
end where this wonder-creature is not eating, and thrust it against
my enemy, then, without hurting me, it will sting my enemy.'

"'Yes,' said the squaw.  'But look, it has eaten nearly all the wood,
and is falling smaller and smaller, like a snowdrift in May,' she
added.

"Porcupine Killer thought of a dry, dead spruce tree that lay near
the mouth of his cave, flat along the ground where a great wind had
thrown it a year before.  But he was afraid to go out, unprotected,
to break branches from this tree and drag them back to the cave.  It
was not yet night, and the giant beasts would be waiting for him.  He
saw one long stick in the fire that was burning for only half its
length and, heeding a voice within him that told him to trust in the
new gift of the gods, he took up the stick by the unscorched end,
crawled through the mouth of the cave, and ran to the fallen tree.
As he ran--'twas only the distance of a dozen strides--he waved the
long stick around his head.  It was twined 'round with red and yellow
flames, and smoke and sparks flew upward from it.  He saw two great
wolves spring out of the forest on his left, glare at him with
glowing eyes and gaping jaws, turn and flee back into the forest.  He
saw a fox (as big as a wolf of to-day) slink out of his path.  Then
he knew that this new and wonderful thing was as surely a terror to
the beasts as it was a joy to him.  They did not even wait for its
sting.  They fled, like hunted hares, at the sight of it!  And he
knew that this terror of it must have been born in the wolves and
foxes even as the joy in it, and love of it, had been born in him.
He leaned the burning stick against the trunk of the fallen tree and
quickly tore off an armful of the dry branches.  Leaving the flaming
stick behind him, he ran back to the cave and quickly replenished the
fire.  Again he returned to the tree and loaded his arms.  Three
times he made the short journey, swiftly, but without much fear of
the beasts.  He knew that many fierce animals were watching him; but
his faith in their terror of the burning stick was great.  When he
crawled from the cave to get the fourth load of wood, a wonderful
sight met his eyes.  The flames from the stick had leapt into the dry
branches of the tree and cloaked them in red and yellow.  Swiftly it
leapt from branch to branch until, in a twinkling, the tree was
blazing along its whole length, from roots to crown.  It made a loud
crackling noise and a roaring like the voices of wind and water.
Smoke and sparks flew upward in clouds.

[Illustration: "He waved the long stick around his head"]

"For a few minutes Porcupine Killer stood just outside the mouth of
his cave and gazed at the wonderful sight with awe.  The first thin
darkness was creeping over the world, and in the gloom the flames and
sparks and smoke made a terrible picture for eyes that had never seen
such a thing before.  But the little chill of fear quickly left his
heart as soon as he began to reason with his brain.  This
creature--one moment so small, and suddenly so great--was his friend
and the friend of all mankind.  It was a wonderful gift that had been
given to him in a beautiful dream.  So he ran forward and stood as
close to the fire as he could.  The heat of it was very great--and
the roaring of the flames and the crackling of the dry wood was loud
in his ears.  He knew that many eyes must now be staring at the great
sight in fear and astonishment and wonder--eyes of his fierce enemies
and eyes of his hunted, starving people.  Many caves were in the same
rocky hillside as his own.  With his back to the noise and the
leaping flames, he stood tall and brave against the terrible red
light and waved his arms high above his head.

"'Come to me, my people!' he cried, with all the strength of his
voice.  'Come to me, and this magic thing will protect you from your
enemies.'

"Broken Arrow was the first to find courage to leave his cave and
draw near to the fire.  He was closely followed by Winter Morning,
the chief.  Porcupine Killer told them in a few words of his dream
and how he had made the fire in his cave; of its comforting warmth;
of its sting; and how the animals feared the sight of it.  Soon a
dozen men and boys stood near the blazing tree.

"'Now is the time to hunt for food,' said Porcupine Killer.  'Do not
go beyond the edge of the red light.'

"They found the body of a huge caribou, freshly killed by the wolves
and but half eaten.  They cut the flesh from it with their stone
knives and axes, and carried it to their caves.  Porcupine Killer
worked with the others and carried two great lumps of meat to his
cave; but he kept his eye on the burning tree.  He soon noticed that
it was quickly lessening in size and heat.  All the branches were
gone and the great trunk alone glowed on the rocky ground.  Flames
and sparks still shot up from it in places, and here and there it had
crumbled to masses of red coals.  Dark night had fallen by now, and
the light from the fire was drawing in, narrower and narrower, every
minute.  By the failing glow of it, Porcupine-Killer gathered a great
many pieces of wood-roots and fallen branches and stumps, and heaped
them close beside the mouth of his cave.  He told Broken Arrow (who
was a clever young warrior) and old Winter Morning, the chief, how
fire could be kept inside one's cave and fed with sticks; and he
lighted two long branches at the glowing coals and gave one into the
hands of each.  Many of the other men, seeing this and hearing
Porcupine Killer's words, lit sticks for themselves and ran back to
their caves, waving them in the air.

"It was quite dark, and the great beasts were roaring and howling and
barking on all sides, when the first man who had ever made fire in
this part of the world returned to his cave.

"He found the fire burning very low,--just a bed of coals,--for the
woman was afraid to feed it with sticks.  He soon had it blazing
brightly; and then, sitting very close to it, he began to cut one of
the big lumps of caribou meat into small pieces, so that he and his
wife might eat after their long hunger.  One of the pieces fell close
to the red coals at the edge of the fire.  He did not notice it, but
soon he began to sniff and look about on every side.

"'What is that queer smell?' he asked.  'It is a smell that increases
my hunger.  What new thing have you in the cave?'

"The squaw told him that there was nothing new in the cave except the
fire and the caribou meat.  But she, too, noticed the smell and began
to sniff and sniff.  Her husband (who had not the baby to hold) was
so attracted by the strange smell that he laid aside the flint knife
and the big lump of meat and went sniffing around the cave, as a
hungry dog sniffs around the outside of a store-house.  But he was
soon back at the fire again, where the smell was much stronger than
anywhere else; and then he happened to see the small piece of meat
that had fallen close to the red coals.  Its color had changed.  It
was red no longer, but brown as a ripe nut; and from it floated up
the smell that made him feel even more hungry than he had felt
before.  He touched it with his finger.  It was very hot, so of
course he stuck his finger in his mouth.  Hah, but it tasted good!
He had never really liked the taste of flesh before, but had always
eaten it quickly, in big mouthfuls, simply to fill his stomach; but
this piece, that had been turned from red to brown by the fire, had a
taste to it that made him think of eating with joy.  With a small
stick he drew it away from the hot coals, and soon the sting of the
fire went out of it and he could hold it in his hands without feeling
any pain.  He cut it in two with his flint knife and gave one half to
his wife.  And they were the first people to eat roasted caribou meat
that I ever heard of!  They liked it so well that they cut many more
slices and placed them close to the red coals of the fire; and the
good, hunger-making smell floated out of the cave and set all sorts
of animals to sniffing and howling.  They liked the strange smell,
too (though they never learned to like it as well as the smell of raw
meat); but they were afraid to go near the cave in the rocky
hill-side from which the smell came, for out of that same cave shone
the red glare of that terrible thing which had eaten up the dead
spruce tree.  They saw the same red glare at the mouths of other
caves and what was left of the spruce tree still glowing angrily in
the dark; so they crouched in a great circle and howled and roared."

Old Squat-by-the-fire stopped her talk suddenly, and began cutting
tobacco for her pipe.  Little Flying Plover sat very still, gazing
into the fire.  He could see all sorts of queer things under the
dancing flames, deep among the red coals--lodges, and hunters running
beside dog-sledges, and warriors fighting mighty battles.

"Why were the animals afraid of the fire?" he asked.

"It was their nature to fear it," replied his grandmother.

"Why didn't it frighten the men, too?" asked the boy.

Squat-by-the-fire wrinkled her forehead and puffed hard at her pipe,
but did not answer.  Flying Plover waited for a minute, and then
asked, "Are animals afraid of fire now?"

His grandmother nodded her head.

"But dogs are not afraid of it.  Dogs like to lie by the fire, all
day and all night," said the boy.

"Dogs were not always fond of fire.  When they were wild--before they
had been tamed by man--they did not like it at all," replied the old
woman.

She puffed very fiercely at her pipe.  "But you must not ask me any
more questions now," she said.  "I must boil the medicine for Red
Cloud's baby again.  It is a very great medicine and has to be boiled
five times, in all, and let cool after each boiling.  So you must not
disturb me, little son of a chief.  Carve at your caribou again, if
the snow is still falling, and I will tell you another story
to-night, if you are a good boy."




VI

  WHY OLD KING WALRUS WENT AWAY
  FROM THE MOUNTAINEERS' COUNTRY

Flying Plover was a good boy.  He carved at the stubborn block of
wood until it looked quite unlike a block of wood and had four legs,
like a caribou.  Then he whittled away at two arrows, and mended one
of his snowshoes.  He did not once disturb his grandmother at her
medicine-making; so after the evening meal the old woman said that,
as he had behaved himself so well and worked so busily, she would
tell him another story.

"I want to know why all the animals are smaller now than they used to
be," said the boy.  "I want to know how that happened and when--and
who did it."

"Easy, easy!" cried Squat-by-the-fire.  "You go too fast with your
'want to know this' and your 'want to know that.'  Stories are not
told by the answering of questions.  You will hear about the changing
of the animals later--but to-night I am going to tell you why old
King Walrus went back to his own country."

She scratched her head, and stared very hard at the fire, as if she
found a good deal of difficulty in remembering the facts.  And that
is not to be wondered at, considering how long ago it was that King
Walrus went away from Labrador, and how many queer things had
happened since then.  Little Flying Plover often wondered at the way
his grandmother remembered those very ancient happenings, and yet
sometimes forgot little things that he could remember perfectly
clearly.  Well, she scratched her head, and stared at the fire--and,
presently, she remembered.

"When King Walrus heard about the strange thing in front of the
two-legged people's hillside," she said, "he floundered to the top of
a near-by hummock and looked at it in wonder and with a queer feeling
inside him.  The queer feeling was fear--and King Walrus had never
felt it before.  He looked at the leaping flames and wondered if the
sky had broken and the red sunset had fallen on the world.  He looked
at the smoke which poured up in black clouds and white clouds and
blue clouds; and he thought that they, too, had fallen from the sky
and were now hurrying back to it.  And the sparks?  Why, the stupid
old fellow thought those were stars.  His people--the smaller
walruses and bears and arctic foxes that had followed him from the
ice-fields--told him that the terrible creature was eating a tree
just as they would eat a fresh cod-fish.  They told him to listen,
and they would hear it growling and cracking the dry wood with its
red teeth.  The old Walrus listened, and sure enough, he heard those
terrible sounds.  So it was certainly not the sky.  'I hope it will
not stay in this country,' he said.  'Where did it come from?'

"A fox said 'One of the man-creatures carried it out to the dead tree
from his den.  It was very small at first--no bigger than my
tongue--and danced on the end of a long stick.  But it was frightful
to look at, even then.'

"'Why did you not jump upon it, and kill it, when it was so small?'
asked old King Walrus.  But he did not speak in his usual loud voice.

"'I had not the courage,' said the fox.  'And I saw some animals, who
are much larger and stronger than I am, turn around and run away,
too,' he added.

"Old blubber-sides could not think of anything just then but the
roaring fire in the valley below.  Though he had believed, at first,
that it was a piece of the red, sunset sky, now that he could hear it
growling and biting the wood with its teeth, he felt sure that it was
some terrible, new animal that would want to fight him as soon as it
had finished eating the tree.  But what had it been doing in the den
of one of the little, miserable, two-legged men-folk?  He lay there
on the hummock and stared and stared, expecting, every moment, to see
it move toward him.

"Then the fox who had spoken before said, 'The same man who put it in
the branches of the tree has another creature of the same kind in his
den.  I smelt it--and I saw its breath rising through a crack in the
rocks.'

"For a moment King Walrus turned his great head from the direction of
the blazing tree and looked at the fox.  'Go down and examine it
closely, and see if it has any legs,' he said.  For a few seconds the
fox did not know what to do or say, and felt very foolish.  He was
afraid of King Walrus--but he was much more afraid of the awful, new
thing down in the valley.  But his wits soon came back to him.  He
told the walrus that, of course, he would gladly obey his command;
and he immediately started off at a brisk trot toward the burning
tree.  He kept on in that direction for about a hundred yards, and
then, reaching a thicket of alders, he skipped in among the twisted
stems, changed his course, and ran for fully a mile in a great
half-circle.  That brought him out on a hilltop at a safe distance
from both the fire and the walrus, and yet in sight of both.  Then he
sat down comfortably to see what would happen.

"Well, as the wood burned away, and fell to coals and ashes, the
great fire in the valley became smaller and smaller.  Night grew dark
over all the wilderness, save where the sparks broke from the
bursting timber and the mouths of several of the men-folk's caves
shone red with the little fires within.

"'See, it gets smaller and smaller, every minute,' said King Walrus
to his people.  It is but a poor creature, after all, and will soon
be dead.  It is nothing but some foolish little magic of the
miserable two-legged people.'

"Then a wolf said, 'Yes, it may die, but I think it has cubs in every
one of the frightened people's dens.  And they will grow, quick as
water running over a stone, and they, too, may have many cubs.'

"At last the flames ceased to dance at all on the ashes of the dead
spruce tree, and the watching animals could see only a few red spots
here and there.  Hours went by, and still they sat on every hilltop
overlooking the valley, howling and snarling and roaring, and staring
with their wide, yellow eyes.  At last they could see no sign of life
at all in the fire.  Then they shouted, one to another, that the
terrible creature was dead; and a number of the bravest of
them--three walruses, and several bears and wolves--stole down to see
what kind of a dinner the body would make.  That is what they were
always thinking about everything--how it would feel in their stomachs.

On the way down to the valley, a bear and a walrus pushed against
each other and immediately began to fight.  Soon the smell of blood
was strong in the air, and all the animals that had started down to
try to eat the dead body of the fire tried to eat one another
instead.  Two great bears, with their claws and their teeth deep in
each other's hides, went rolling down a steep side of a hill straight
into the coals and ashes of the spruce tree.  Of course the fire was
not dead!  There was a great bed of hot, red coals under the ashes.
Little flames sprang up around the bodies of the fighting bears, and
began to eat the long, thick coats of fur.  The bears felt the awful
stings, and quickly let go of each other and scrambled to their feet.
Their backs and sides were smarting and their noses and paws were
terribly blistered.  They saw the red and yellow coals all about
them, blinking and shining like the eyes of wicked devils--and their
hearts melted with fear.  Away they ran, howling and roaring, with
the flames leaping high on their backs.  It was a frightful sight.
The animals that saw it, all dashed away to their dens, fearing that
the dreadful red creatures might chase them and spring upon their
backs as they had sprung upon the backs of the fighting bears.  Even
old King Walrus went heaving and lumbering away, and hid between two
hummocks of rock.  As for the unfortunate bears who had rolled into
the fire, they ran straight ahead, without caring or seeing or
thinking where they were running to.  They were blind with terror and
mad with pain.  They ran and ran until at last one of them fell into
Beaver River and the other into Black Fox Pond.  Of course the water
killed the fire on their backs and sides, but for a long time they
just swam around and around in the cold water.  At last, though they
still smarted and ached all over, they knew that the terrible
creatures had gone away from them.  So they swam ashore--one to the
bank of the river and one to the bank of the pond--and ran seaward as
hard as they could.  All they thought about was the quickest way of
getting out of that terrible country.

[Illustration: "Away they ran, howling and roaring"]

"Now it happened that Porcupine Killer and the other men of the tribe
knew nothing about the trouble of the two bears and the fright which
all the other animals had received.  If they had known they would
have felt very happy.  They had heard more howls and yells and roars
than usual, but did not know what the trouble was.  When Porcupine
Killer awoke he fed the coals of his fire with sticks of dry wood,
and broiled several slices of caribou meat for breakfast.  He was
very merry, and could not help singing when he thought of how life
had changed since the morning before.  Now he and his wife and baby,
and nearly every one in the tribe, had food to eat, and a warmth like
sunlight in their caves, and a friend that struck terror to the
hearts of the fierce animals.  His wife awoke at the noise of his
song (for he was not a very fine singer) and she, too, was happy as
soon as the fog of sleep had passed from her mind and she remembered
the wonderful thing that had happened.  After they had eaten,
Porcupine Killer said, 'I am going out to frighten the animals
again--and to-day they shall be frightened more than they were
yesterday.  This wonderful thing that dances and whispers so
peacefully on the floor of our cave is greater than all the fangs and
claws and tusks of all the animals in the world.  And it is my
friend--the friend of the tribe.  I shall hunt old King Walrus
himself, and cause him to repent of the evil he has done.'

"The woman begged him not to be rash.  The giant animals had ruled
the country so long, and hunted men as men hunt hares and foxes now,
that she could not believe that anything was stronger than the
animals.  But Porcupine Killer had no fear, since he had seen the
power of the fire.  He looked out of the mouth of the cave, and saw
the ashes of the fire lying black and gray on the rocky ground.  He
looked all around the sides of the valley, lying quiet in the
brightness of the autumn morning, and could not see so much as a
skulking fox.  He crawled out and looked to the right and left, at
the holes in the rocky hillside where so many of his own people
lived.  He saw little wisps of smoke rising here and there from among
the boulders and from the mouths of some of the caves.  He shouted
for the hidden warriors to come out.  Winter Morning, the chief, and
Broken Arrow were the first to appear.  Porcupine Killer called to
them that he was going on a great hunt, and that they should see
wonderful things happen before the sun had reached the top of the sky.

"'We saw many wonders yesterday, great Magician,' said Winter
Morning.  'What new wonders will you show us to-day?'

"'I am not a magician,' replied Porcupine Killer, who was an honest
young man.  'But the wonder you shall see to-day will be the hunting
of the fierce animals that have hunted us since the beginning of
time.'

"Six warriors joined Porcupine Killer in front of his cave.  They
looked at every hill and wood and rock, but could not see one of
their enemies.  'We are the masters of the world,' said Porcupine
Killer.  He took a burning stick in his hand, from his own fire, and
led the warriors to the other side of the little valley.  They passed
the long heap of dead ashes and coals, where the tree had burned the
night before.  The ashes were still warm, and deep in the middle of
the mass a few coals were still alive.  At the far side of the valley
they threw together a great heap of dry bushes and moss and fallen
logs.  To this Porcupine Killer set a flame from the torch in his
hand; and in a minute it was crackling and breathing and blazing, and
lifting clouds of black smoke into the air.  Then each warrior took a
blazing stick from the heap, and again Porcupine Killer led them
forward.  They had not gone far before two wolves sprang from a grove
of spruces in front of them and went galloping away.  At that, the
warriors shouted and laughed, and waved their blazing sticks.  It
made them feel great and brave to see the very same beasts that were
in the habit of hunting them turn tail and run at the sight of them.
They went up to the top of the hill and there built another fire in a
rocky place.  And so they moved forward over hills and hummocks and
barrens, and through patches of dark forest, sending all manner of
animals fleeing before them.  Here and there they built and lit new
fires, to protect their homeward trail; but Porcupine Killer chose
the places for these fires with great care.  'It does not eat rocks,'
he said.  So all the fires were made on rocky places, away from trees
and bushes.  Porcupine Killer had a thought in the back of his head
that it would not be wise for all the forests in the country to be
devoured by this wonderful new creature.

"At last the warriors came upon old King Walrus himself, lying sound
asleep in a narrow valley between two small hills.  He was all alone,
for his followers had deserted him during the night.  Porcupine
Killer made a sign to his companions to be very quiet.  They hid
along the crest of one of the hills, above the great, round back of
King Walrus.  Then Porcupine Killer gathered a huge armful of dry
moss and twigs, set it alight with his torch, and threw it down upon
the walrus's back.  Then, standing on a high rock and waving his
torch so that the smoke and sparks flew thick and fast, he shouted,
'Wake up, old blubbersides, and return to your own country!  Wake up
and see the Red Spirit sitting on your back!'

"Through his heavy, troubled dreams old King Walrus heard the voice
and felt a horrible sting in his fat back.  He lifted his huge head
and cast one glance at Porcupine Killer and the flaming stick.  He
felt the teeth of the terrible red creature, and knew that it had
caught him in his sleep.  With a bellow of terror that nearly
deafened the hidden warriors, he floundered out of the valley and
travelled seaward as fast as he could go."

Squat-by-the-fire puffed hard at her pipe, and stared into the fire.

"Did he get home?" asked Flying Plover.

"Yes.  He reached the sea, and dashed into the deep water, and swam
straight home to his lands of ice and snow," replied the old woman.

"And what did Porcupine Killer do?" asked the little boy.

"He went home, too, and cooked a fine caribou steak for his dinner."

"Did all the animals run out of the country?"

"No.  In time they lost some of their fear of the fire.  But they
were always afraid to go very close to it."

"When were the animals made as small as they are now?"

"That belongs to another story.  If I tell you any more now, my brain
will split and the skin will come off my throat again," replied the
old woman.




VII

ANOTHER STORY OF GLUSKAP AND HIS PEOPLE

"A time came when the great animals in Gluskap's own country broke
the good rules he had made for them," began old Squat-by-the-fire.
"They were so big and strong, and had become so accustomed to seeing
Gluskap in the form of a small young man, that they forgot how
powerful he was.  They were by nature fierce and bloodthirsty, though
they had hidden the evil deep in their hearts for many years.  The
trouble was started by a great wolf.  He stuck his head into a man's
lodge and glared at the man's children until they all began to cry
with fright.  Then the man was angry, and struck the wolf on the
snout with a club.  At that, the wolf caught the man between his
cruel jaws and killed him.  The taste of the human blood awoke all
the evil that had been sleeping for so long in his heart.  Then he
ran about the country, chasing men and women and every animal smaller
or weaker than himself, and killing many of them.  At sight of that
all the other wolves and fierce animals felt a madness in their
brains, and began to hunt and kill.  Gluskap left his lodge at the
noise and looked about him with eyes that could see for the distance
of a four days' journey.  At sight of the blood and the hunting
beasts he was filled with anger.  By his magic he made himself as
high as a mountain.  Then he caught the animals in his great hands,
reaching here and there after them, across hills and valleys; and as
he returned each animal to the ground it was as small as its kind is
to-day.  And this he did all over the world; and from that day to
this the animals have no more been masters of the wilderness.  Then
he led the men and women and children of the tribe, who had been in
his care for so many years, far away to a country of thick forest and
broad rivers--a finer country, I have heard, than even this land of
ours.  There they built villages and prospered, and for many hundreds
of years Gluskap continued to be as a father to them."

"What did his people do, in their fine new country?" asked Flying
Plover.

"They did many things," replied the old woman.  "I have heard from
Micmacs on the coast that in time there came to be many magicians in
that country.  Some of the magic was good, such as Gluskap himself
knew; and some was bad--and that was practiced by his enemies.  Yes,
he had many enemies--evil people who hated him because he always
fought against evil."

"Please tell me something about the magic," begged the little boy.

The old medicine woman thought for a long time, and scratched her
head very hard.

"I know only one story about the magic of Gluskap's people--and I am
not sure if it is a true story or not, for I heard it from a Micmac
fisherman on the coast," she said.

"Long ago, in the country of Gluskap's people--the new country to
which he had led them from the barren lands--there lived three boys
in one big lodge.  They were the sons of the chief of the village.
One day, while they were at play in the woods at some distance from
their father's lodge, they heard a sudden squeak and a sound of
struggling in a nearby thicket.  They ran swiftly to the place, and
were in time to save a little brown hare from the hunger of a
wildcat.  They beat the wildcat with sticks until it sprang away.
They carried the wounded hare to their lodge, and there washed and
dressed its hurts.  In a day or two it was able to hop about the
lodge.  One morning, when the father and mother were fishing in the
river, the hare spoke to the children with a human voice.  'My
friends,' it said, 'to-day I must journey far to the northward, on
Gluskap's business.  For your kindness to me each of you shall
receive a magic gift.  I shall name the gifts, so each can make his
choice, and to-night you will find them at the door of your lodge.'
The boys were dumb with wonder, for they knew that the little brown
hare must be a great magician.  'First,' the hare continued, 'are the
moccasins of the wind.  With these on his feet a man can run above
the tree-tops, on the currents of the air.  Second, is the wallet of
plenty.  With this at his belt, a man will never lack either food or
water.  The third gift is an arrow of red wood, feathered with red
and barbed with yellow metal.'

"The oldest boy chose the moccasins of the wind.  The second in age
said that the wallet of plenty seemed a fine thing to him.  So the
youngest got the red arrow.  Then the hare hopped away into the
bushes; and at night the three gifts lay by the door of the lodge.
The seasons passed.  The boy who possessed the moccasins of the wind
became a great hunter and warrior.

"When he was twenty years of age he was made chief of the village.
His lodge was spread deep with the pelts of wolves and bears and
foxes.  He was a great man--and all owing to the virtue of the magic
moccasins.  But he did not always remember that.  He was full of
pride.  The second brother grew sleek, and slow of wit.  Cooked food
and fresh water were always at his side, so he was content to sit
still.  But the youngest of the brothers was neither famous nor lazy.
He was a brave fighter, but he led no war parties.  He was a good
hunter and worked hard for his living.  He could find no magic in the
red arrow, though he had put it to many tests.  It shot no straighter
and flew no farther than the other shafts in his quiver.  But he
always kept it near him, ready for whatever might happen, for his
faith in its virtue was strong.

"One day in early autumn the young man with the red arrow left the
village of his people.  Something had spoken to him in his sleep, and
had told him that a great adventure awaited him in a far country.  So
he journeyed northward and westward, by whatever trails came most
readily to his feet.  Game was plenty, so he did not want for food.
On the evening of the third day of his journey he came to the edge of
a great barren.  It spread before him, treeless from horizon to
horizon.  But a little voice in his brain told him that his way led
straight on.

"After he had traveled over that great barren for more than two days
he saw a line of blue hills far to the north.  While he was still
many miles distant from them he caught sight of something running
swiftly toward him.  As it drew near him he saw, greatly to his
wonder, that it was a young woman.  Her eyes were bright with terror,
and she ran unsteadily over the rough ground.  When she saw the young
man she swerved in her course and ran to him, crying out that a
terrible wizard followed her in the form of a great bear.  The youth
set an arrow to the string of his bow; and, as he waited for the bear
to appear, the girl told him that he who hunted her was the most
powerful of all the evil wizards, and that he could take upon himself
at pleasure the form of any bird or animal.

[Illustration: Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily]

"Suddenly the great bear appeared, galloping heavily but swiftly.
Its small eyes burned with ferocity.  Its narrow, scarlet tongue hung
from its jaws.  As the youth drew his bow he noticed that the red
arrow was the one he had chanced to draw from his belt.  He loosed it
straight at the shoulder of the advancing beast.  It flashed from the
string and vanished.  The bear advanced.  The young brave trembled,
and the girl cried out in dismay.  But in a second the red arrow fell
at its master's feet, and across its haft hung the moccasins of the
wind.  In a flash the young man understood.  He tore his own
moccasins from his feet and replaced them with the magic pair.  Then
he returned the red arrow to his quiver and caught the girl in his
arms.  She felt no heavier than a young fox, so great was the magic
of the moccasins.

"'Have no fear,' he said, and sprang away.  Under his speeding feet
the earth swam back and melted behind them, and the gray, brown,
blue, and red of its tinted surface mixed like colored waters.  For a
thousand miles the wizard followed, now with the stride of a moose,
now with the wings of an eagle; but he was left so far behind in the
first half-second that he lost both scent and sight of them before
the magic moccasins had made a dozen strides.  So you may believe
that at the end of his thousand miles he was very far on the wrong
trail.  When the young man paused to take breath he found that floors
and heaps of ice stretched away on all sides.  The air was bitterly
cold.  Overhead the dome of heaven was alive with the magnificent,
drifting radiance of the Northern Lights.  The girl lay weakly
against his arm, for the speed of their flight had held her breath in
her nostrils.  Presently she opened her eyes and looked about her
fearfully.

"'How came we to this place?' she asked.

"'By the magic of the moccasins of the wind,' he told her, pointing
down at the gaily beaded shoes on his feet.

"She trembled and hid her face.  'It was like death,' she said.

"Then the youth understood that to endure the tremendous flight of
the moccasins one must also be possessed of their strength.  For
hours they wandered about in search of shelter and food.  In
unhurried motion the young man's feet experienced none of the magic.
He was thankful for that.  At last the girl sank on the ice, faint
for want of food and drink.  Then the man bethought him of the red
arrow, and, fitting it to his bow, fired it at a distance.

"'Its virtue is so great,' he thought, 'that it may bring a fowl or a
fish to me, to keep this woman from death.'  In a second the arrow
was at his feet, and midway on the red shaft hung the wallet of
plenty.  Thankfully they ate and drank, and hearts and bodies
recovered strength.

"Many moons later the possessor of the red arrow, accompanied by the
beautiful young woman, approached the lodges of his own people.  At
his belt, securely wrapped in water-tight skins, he carried the
moccasins of the wind and the wallet of plenty.  He was an honest
man, and wished to return them to the rightful owners uninjured.  A
mile from the village they met the second brother--the man who had
chosen the wallet of plenty from among the three gifts.  Upon his
shoulders he carried a great stick of maple-wood.  In appearance he
had changed surprisingly since the other's departure.  The muscles
stood out on his lean arms and legs, and his eyes were merry; whereas
of old his limbs had been heavy with fat and his eyes dull.

"'Why do you carry that great log?' asked the wanderer, after they
had exchanged brotherly greetings.

"'To split and store away, for the making of paddles and arrow-shafts
in the stormy days of winter,' replied the other.

"The wanderer handed him the wallet of plenty--but, upon opening it,
they found that it was empty.

"''Tis better so,' remarked the maker of paddles, as he hoisted the
stick of maple back to his shoulders.

"At the outskirts of the village, in a modest wigwam, the young
couple found the eldest of the three brothers, the man who had chosen
the moccasins of the wind.  He was lying on a couch of skins, and his
children played about the door.  His greeting was modest and kindly.
But he could not rise from his couch to welcome them.

"'In my pride,' he said, 'I forgot that my prowess in the chase and
the battle was all of the magic moccasins.  I thought myself the very
equal of Gluskap.  But the moccasins flew away from me, and in the
next hunt I was stricken to the earth by a wounded moose--for I was
no stronger than the youngest warrior and no swifter than the oldest
chief.'

"The new-comer produced the moccasins of the wind from the bag at his
side, and gave them into the hands of the fallen chieftain.  At that
moment a tall stranger entered the wigwam and took the moccasins from
his hands.  Then, turning to the other, he took the red arrow from
the quiver.  Already the wallet of plenty hung at his belt of blue
wampum.

"'The three gifts were equal in the sight of Gluskap,' he said, 'but
you see how you have driven their magic to the desires of your own
hearts.  Only the red arrow worked to its full power, and in doing so
it has doubled its magic.  Now Gluskap has need of it, and takes it
back as a gift from this young man.'  He turned, and glided from the
lodge."

"Who was it?" asked Flying Plover.

"I don't know; but perhaps it was Gluskap himself," replied the old
woman.

"Do you know any more stories about the red arrow?" asked the boy.

"Perhaps I do," said the old woman.  "But I'll not tell you any more
to-night."



THE END



[Illustration: End paper--left]



[Illustration: End paper--right]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLYING PLOVER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
